Incline your ear, and hear the words of the wise, and apply your heart to my knowledge,
Proverbs 22:17 (English Standard Version)
Call out for insight, and cry aloud for understanding.
Proverbs 2:3 (Common English Bible)
Do yourself a favor and love wisdom. Learn all you can, then watch your life flourish and prosper!
Proverbs 19:8 (The Passion Translation)
“But he who sins against me injures himself; All those who hate me love death.”
Proverbs 8:36 (New American Standard Bible)
How then does a man gain the essence of wisdom? We cross the threshold of true knowledge when we live in complete awe and adoration of God. Stubborn know-it-alls will never stop to do this, for they scorn true wisdom and knowledge.
Proverbs 1:7 (The Passion Translation)
Do not be wise in your own eyes; Fear the Lord [with reverent awe and obedience] and turn [entirely] away from evil.
Proverbs 3:7 (Amplified Bible)
So make wisdom your quest – search for the revelation of life’s meaning. Don’t let what I say go in one ear and out the other. Stick with wisdom and she will stick to you, protecting you throughout your days. She will rescue all those who passionately listen to her voice.
Proverbs 4:5-6 (The Passion Translation)
Wisdom is the most important thing; so get wisdom. If it costs everything you have, get understanding.
Proverbs 4:7 (New Century Version)
Those who find true wisdom obtain the tools for understanding, the proper way to live, for they will have a fountain of blessing pouring into their lives. To gain the riches of wisdom is far greater than gaining the wealth of the world. As wisdom increases, a great treasure is imparted, greater than many bars of refined gold.
Proverbs 3:13-14 (The Passion Translation)
For the Lord gives wisdom; from his mouth come knowledge and understanding;
Proverbs 2:6 (English Standard Version)
Fear of the Lord is the foundation of wisdom. Knowledge of the Holy One results in good judgment.
Proverbs 9:10 (New Living Translation)
A wise son accepts his father’s discipline, but a scoffer does not listen to rebuke.
Proverbs 13:1 (New American Standard Bible)
There are four things on earth that are small but unusually wise: Ants—they aren’t strong, but they store up food all summer. Hyraxes—they aren’t powerful, but they make their homes among the rocks. Locusts—they have no king, but they march in formation. Lizards—they are easy to catch, but they are found even in kings’ palaces.
Proverbs 30:24-28 (New Living Translation)
Your boast becomes a prophecy of a future failure. The higher you lift up yourself in pride, the harder you’ll fall in disgrace.
Proverbs 16:18 (The Passion Translation)
When you act with presumption, convinced that you’re right, don’t be surprised if you fall flat on your face! But walking in humility helps you to make wise decisions.
Proverbs 11:2 (The Passion Translation)
Pride leads to conflict; those who take advice are wise.
Proverbs 13:10 (New Living Translation)
Exalting yourself is disgusting to the Lord, for pride attracts his punishment- and you can count on that!
Proverbs 16:5 (The Passion Translation)
It is better to be of a lowly spirit with the poor than to divide the spoil with the proud.
Proverbs 16:19 (English Standard Version)
Pride comes before a disaster, but humility comes before respect.
Proverbs 18:12 (Common English Bible)
Haughty eyes, a proud heart, and evil actions are all sin.
Proverbs 21:4 (New Living Translation)
An arrogant man is inflated with pride – nothing but a snooty scoffer in love with his own opinion. “Mr. Mocker” is his name!
Proverbs 21:24 (The Passion Translation)
Do you see a man who is wise in his own eyes? There is more hope for a fool than for him.
Proverbs 26:12 (English Standard Version)
Let another praise you, and not your own mouth; a stranger, and not your own lips.
Proverbs 27:2 (English Standard Version)
One’s pride will bring him low, but he who is lowly in spirit will obtain honor.
Proverbs 29:23 (English Standard Version)
The tongue has the power of life and death, and those who love it will eat its fruit.
Proverbs 18:21 (New International Version)
When there are many words, transgression is unavoidable, but he who restrains his lips is wise.
Proverbs 10:19 (New American Standard Bible)
Don’t respond to the words of a fool with more foolish words, or you will become as foolish as he is!
Proverbs 26:4 (The Passion Translation)
The lips of the godly speak helpful words, but the mouth of the wicked speaks perverse words.
Proverbs 10:32 (New Living Translation)
Lovers of God think before they speak, but the careless blurt out wicked words meant to cause harm.
Proverbs 15:28 (The Passion Translation)
A lying tongue hates its victims, and a flattering mouth works ruin.
Proverbs 26:28 (English Standard Version)
A gossip betrays a confidence, but a trustworthy person keeps a secret.
Proverbs 11:13 (New International Version)
He who loves purity of heart, and whose speech is gracious, will have the king as his friend.
Proverbs 22:11 (English Standard Version)
Respond gently when you are confronted and you’ll defuse the rage of another. Responding with sharp, cutting words will only make it worse. Don’t you know that being angry can ruin the testimony of even the wisest of men?
Proverbs 15:1 (The Passion Translation)
Do you see a man who is hasty in his words? There is more hope for a fool than for him.
Proverbs 29:20 (English Standard Version)
Guard your words and you’ll guard your life, but if you don’t control your tongue, it will ruin everything.
Proverbs 13:3 (The Passion Translation)
Those who guard their mouths and their tongues guard themselves from trouble.
Proverbs 21:23 (Common English Bible)
She opens her mouth with wisdom, and the teaching of kindness is on her tongue.
Proverbs 31:26 (English Standard Version)
Reckless words are like the thrusts of a sword, cutting remarks meant to stab and to hurt. But the words of the wise soothe and heal.
Proverbs 12:18 (The Passion Translation)
Fools vent their anger, but the wise quietly hold it back.
Proverbs 29:11 (New Living Translation)
Listen well to wise counsel and be willing to learn from correction so that by the end of your life you’ll be known for your wisdom.
Proverbs 19:20 (The Passion Translation)
To learn the truth you must long to be teachable, or you can despise correction and remain ignorant.
Proverbs 12:1 (The Passion Translation)
Whoever conceals his transgressions will not prosper, but he who confesses and forsakes them will obtain mercy.
Proverbs 28:13 (English Standard Version)
Give careful thought to the paths for your feet and be steadfast in all your ways. Do not turn to the right or the left; keep your foot from evil.
Proverbs 4:26-27 (New International Version)
Trust in the Lord with all your heart, and do not lean on your own understanding. In all your ways acknowledge him, and he will make straight your paths.
Proverbs 3:5-6 (English Standard Version)
Above all else, guard your heart, for everything you do flows from it.
Proverbs 4:23 (New International Version)
But the path of the righteous is like the light of dawn, which shines brighter and brighter until full day.
Proverbs 4:18 (English Standard Version)
The name of the Lord is a strong tower; the righteous man runs into it and is safe.
Proverbs 18:10 (English Standard Version)
Before you do anything, put your trust totally in God and not in yourself. Then every plan you make will succeed.
Proverbs 16:3 (The Passion Translation)
Within your heart you can make plans for your future, but the Lord chooses the steps you take to get there.
Proverbs 16:9 (The Passion Translation)
The road of those who do right turns away from evil; those who protect their path guard their lives.
Proverbs 16:17 (Common English Bible)
Many are the plans in the mind of a man, but it is the purpose of the Lord that will stand.
Proverbs 19:21 (English Standard Version)
A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to rest, and poverty will come upon you like a robber, and want like an armed man.
Proverbs 6:10-11 (English Standard Version)
“For the turning away of the naive will kill them, and the careless ease of [self-righteous] fools will destroy them. But whoever listens to me (Wisdom) will live securely and in confident trust and will be at ease, without fear or dread of evil.”
Proverbs 1:32-33 (Amplified Bible)
When the righteous increase, the people rejoice, but when the wicked rule, the people groan.
Proverbs 29:2 (English Standard Version)
Lazy hands make for poverty, but diligent hands bring wealth.
Proverbs 10:4 (New International Version)
A prudent man conceals knowledge, but the heart of fools proclaims folly.
Proverbs 12:23 (English Standard Version)
The wise have wealth and luxury, but fools spend whatever they get.
Proverbs 21:20 (New Living Translation)
One gives freely, yet grows all the richer; another withholds what he should give, and only suffers want.
Proverbs 11:24 (English Standard Version)
The simple believes everything, but the prudent gives thought to his steps.
Proverbs 14:15 (English Standard Version)
Whoever puts up security for a stranger will surely suffer, but whoever refuses to shake hands in pledge is safe.
Proverbs 11:15 (New International Version)
Work hard at your job and you’ll have what you need. Following a get-rich-quick scheme is nothing but a fantasy.
Proverbs 12:11 (The Passion Translation)
Whoever loves pleasure will be a poor man; he who loves wine and oil will not be rich.
Proverbs 21:17 (English Standard Version)
Glorify God with all your wealth, honoring him with your very best, with every increase that comes to you.
Proverbs 3:9 (The Passion Translation)
Greedy people try to get rich quick but don’t realize they’re headed for poverty.
Proverbs 28:22 (New Living Translation)
The rich rules over the poor, and the borrower is the slave of the lender.
Proverbs 22:7 (English Standard Version)
A man of many companions may come to ruin, but there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother.
Proverbs 18:24 (English Standard Version)
The eye that mocks a father and scorns to obey a mother will be picked out by the ravens of the valley and eaten by the vultures.
Proverbs 30:17 (English Standard Version)
Like one who takes away a garment in cold weather, and like vinegar on soda, is one who sings songs to a heavy heart.
Proverbs 25:20 (New King James Version)
If you want to grow in wisdom, then spend time with the wise. Walk with the wicked and you’ll eventually become just like them.
Proverbs 13:20 (The Passion Translation)
Drive out a scoffer, and strife will go out, and quarreling and abuse will cease.
Proverbs 22:10 (English Standard Version)
A friend loves at all times, and a brother is born for adversity.
Proverbs 17:17 (English Standard Version)
A brother who has been insulted is harder to win back than a walled city, and arguments separate people like the barred gates of a palace.
Proverbs 18:19 (New Century Version)
With patience a ruler may be persuaded, and a soft tongue will break a bone.
Proverbs 25:15 (English Standard Version)
A scoffer does not like to be reproved; he will not go to the wise.
Proverbs 15:12 (English Standard Version)
A peaceful heart leads to a healthy body; jealousy is like cancer in the bones.
Proverbs 14:30 (New Living Translation)
Iron sharpens iron, and one man sharpens another.
Proverbs 27:17 (English Standard Version)
Charm is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a woman who fears the Lord is to be praised.
Proverbs 31:30 (English Standard Version)
It’s better to live in a hut in the wilderness than with a crabby, scolding spouse!
Proverbs 21:19 (The Passion Translation)
An excellent wife is the crown of her husband, but she who brings shame is like rottenness in his bones.
Proverbs 12:4 (English Standard Version)
A gracious woman gains respect, but ruthless men gain only wealth.
Proverbs 11:16 (New Living Translation)
He who finds a wife finds a good thing and obtains favor from the Lord.
Proverbs 18:22 (English Standard Version)
It’s much better to have a kind, loving family, even with little, than to have great wealth with nothing but hatred and strife all around you.
Proverbs 15:17 (The Passion Translation)
When the Lord blesses you with riches, you have nothing to regret.
Proverbs 10:22 (Contemporary English Version)
Start children off on the way they should go, and even when they are old they will not turn from it.
Proverbs 22:6 (New International Version)
An excellent wife who can find? She is far more precious than jewels.
Proverbs 31:10 (English Standard Version)
Charm is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a woman who fears the Lord is to be praised.
Proverbs 31:30 (English Standard Version)
Honor her for all that her hands have done, and let her works bring her praise at the city gate.
Proverbs 31:31 (New International Version)
An excellent wife who can find? She is far more precious than jewels.
Proverbs 31:10 (English Standard Version)
A gracious woman gains respect, but ruthless men gain only wealth.
Proverbs 11:16 (New Living Translation)
The heart of her husband trusts in her, and he will have no lack of gain.
Proverbs 31:11 (English Standard Version)
An endless drip, drip, drip, from a leaky faucet and the words of a cranky, nagging wife have the same effect.
Proverbs 27:15 (The Passion Translation)
Every wise woman encourages and builds up her family, but a foolish woman over time will tear it down by her own actions.
Proverbs 14:1 (The Passion Translation)